Well, that I wanted to
get where the action was and where I was needed and
where I was trained to be.
I hadn't trained to be in the State Department down
in South America where the war going on worldwide
and all my friends
on the way. Did you put in for a transfer? Well, that
was almost every day, every opportunity I had. I'd
been doing that for a long time. They were, the War
Department was insistent that I stay where I was.
And the Chief of Staff of the Air Force was asking
for me every chance he got.
He finally got me, but it took a long time. Once you
get Air Force officer got detached and with
another department.
That was free to that department, you see. Sure.
It's hell to get them out.
Real hard to get them out. Were you happy to leave
Costa Rica and go to Miami Beach in 1942, even
though you were still in the American
Intelligence Command? Well, actually I had to
leave Panama. You see, when I was relieved in
Colombia, finally I was assigned to that
intelligence office in Panama, Canal Zone. And I
got relieved from there and went to Miami Beach.
And yes, I was. Not that I was happy about the
intelligence command, but I got closer back where
I could start doing something by getting back in
the airport. That's what I wanted to do. Now what
is, what was your job as Air Officer, American
Intelligence Command? Well, American
Intelligence Command was a command that was set up
to provide intelligence of the North and South
American continents. Geographic kind of
division of responsibility for collection,
evaluation, and what not. And my job there was to
head the air section of that and collect and
evaluate and report intelligence information
for the North and South American continent area
into the head G2 office in Pentagon. Why do they
have a qualified pilot of bombers do a job like
that? Why didn't they have another Air Force
officer, like a navigator or someone like that?
Why a pilot?
There are ways and ways to look at that, of course.
And if you have someone who is evaluating air
information,
you will take or assume a qualification of a pilot
officer before you would of a non-pilot officer.
That's natural. I certainly would. So if you can
afford the luxury of having a pilot in that job,
you're going to have him in here. If you can't, you
just settle for what's next best. and they were
able to hold me for it for a while. And did they give
you a promotion? Yes, I was promoted as long as I was
already way behind at that time. I can't say that
this command kept me behind. I was just behind
because I wasn't in the Air Force doing things that
warranted promotion.
But I was promoted, I believe, to major within that
command. I'm sure that's right, yeah. And how many
men under your command?
Well, not really a very
good measure of
the job. There were probably...
300 in that order, but there's scattered
detachments all over the whole western
hemisphere. And most of them were reporting
rather than acting under command. They were
under command insofar as the function of
reporting information is concerned. But someone
else, their parent command was charged with
providing the other things that one provides on
command, food and shelter and transportation and
all these kind of things. So this is much more like a
staff job than it is a command job. And you must have
worked directly with the Army and the Navy Yes,
they're in the same building for this command. The
whole thing there was under, well it was under army
officer at that time. And is this sort of a
predecessor to the DIA? Well, yes, except DIA of
course is worldwide.
No, I wouldn't say that. G-2. Were you in the OSS? I
mean, was it part of that? No, no. No, it was part of
the Army Air Force intelligence.
DIA developed later out of other considerations.
This
was just an administrative way of handling
information at that time by G-2. of the Army.
I don't think it had any real long-range
significance at all. It was just a way of getting it
done at that time. Were there major problems that
you had? Were there certain things that you were
looking for? Well, every day of course there are
those things, and they change almost every day.
Not quite,
Subversion of local governments was one of the big
problems.
German-Italian influence of various activities
that went on in the Western Hemisphere. And of
course information on German submarines was just
every minute of every day and night.
There were many things they were looking for, yes.
Did you spot German submarines? Oh yes, many of
them. Oh yes, we did. We were instrumental in
getting a lot of them sunk.
Now were there certain governments in South and
Central America or in the Caribbean that you were
more concerned about coming under German or
Italian influence than others? Oh, yeah. What
were those?
Well, even at this late date, I think it's probably
not good to discuss that very much.
Some are well known, but some aren't.
Columbia
had some wonderful people in its government, but
there were lots of people
who weakened what that government could do, how
effective it was. It was strongly
pro-Axis.
To a greater or lesser degree, there were others.
It's probably not too good to talk about that one
very much, even now.
Okay. In 1943, July of 43, you left. You were eager
to leave, I bet. Yes. In May of 43, I got my orders to
the Second Air Force. That was headquarters in
Spokane, Washington.
commanded by a man named Johnson, for whom I had
worked at Hamilton Field, and he knew me.
So, when he heard I was coming back, he assigned me
to command a group of B-24s to go to North Africa as
fast as I could train them and get them out of there.
he had a chief of staff
named Nathan Bedford Forrest.
And when he saw that I had been out of the States for
about seven years,
and hadn't done my tour of duty as training in the
United States, training others, He couldn't
stand to see me pick up a group and go to North
Africa. He thought I ought to do my stint here
first. So while I was en route from Spokane to
Tucson, where the group was to be, he changed my
order. Ordered me to take over the training group,
and the guy who had the training group to take my
group. and put it together and go to North Africa,
which we did.
Meantime,
when I got the training group started, the wing of
which we were a part, I think had seventeen groups
in it. were in bad need of an operations officer.
And the man who was commanding it knew me and knew my
experience. And so he relieved me of the training
group and made me the wing operations officer.
I was the wing operations officer about three
weeks when I got a wire from the chief of staff's
office in Washington
ordering me to India.
So
my wife and family had just joined me there, and
we moved into a house in Tucson because there were
no quarters available.
So I went home
told my wife what to do about getting my bag
together in the afternoon. I worked that night and
got home early the next morning. I got on the
airplane for India that afternoon about one
o'clock and didn't get back for about thirty
months. What were your thoughts on going to India?
It was going to war. I was just as happy Was it India
or anyplace else? That doesn't bother me. I'll
find out what there was in India. General
Stratmire had asked for me. That's all I wanted to
know.
General Strat was a group commander of the 7th Bomb
Group back at Hamilton Field and I was his pilot and
his operations officer there as a second
lieutenant. He hadn't seen me since that time, but
he knew what I could do. So he wanted me in India. So
he promoted me to colonel and put me on the airplane
and we went to New Delhi, the next stop.
And when did you arrive in New Delhi?
Late July, July 25th as I remember, late July of 43.
He
assigned me there as assistant to the Deputy Chief
of Staff Operations for Air Force's CBI, China
India Burma Theater.
And I worked at that job until I got to know India and
know what was there and
what the British capability was and what we could
do, learn my way around. What was the British
capability? Well, the British had some air forces
there, mainly Indian air units that were manned by
Indians. And
it was practically negligible, not very much. And
we didn't have very much either. We had the 10th Air
Force there, which had the 7th Bomb Group, the same
group I had back in Hamilton Field, the same group I
was
in. And a couple of fighter units. That's all they
had. The 14th Air Force, of course, in China with
Chennault, which wasn't under that headquarters
yet at that time.
I went on and worked in that job, and we got orders
from Washington to work out a plan for bringing to
bear the B-29s on Japan.
And
so for the next almost a month,
my assistant and I, a man named Mean, generated the
plan to base the B-29s in India through Chengdu and
China and hit Japan and staged back through
Chengdu to India for Beijing.
And that was day and night around the clock in the
war room until we got it finished and handed it to
the guy to take to Washington. Well, they approved
it later and then we had to implement it, so we got
busy about that.
And how many bomb runs did we have using that run?
Oh, quite a lot.
Yeah, I don't remember now.
They probably went on around 20 missions, and
there were three squadrons of B-29s.
There'd be like 50 at a mission. So there was some
very substantial effort before we got through it.
And is it from this area that we did a lot of the
firebombs? Yes, they did a great deal of it, a very
great deal of it.
Much of that though came from Saipan, came from the
other way after they captured Saipan. Amen. We
considered the firebombs not an adequate
payload. The things that we needed, thought
needed damaging, we couldn't do it with
firebombs. Heavy submarine installations and
heavy
revetments and stuff, we were after.
And did you do any of the bombing in China itself
against Japanese forces in the Manchuria area or
in North China? Not with the B-29. We operated
against them all the time with the B-24, B-25, all
of the fighter
and fighter bomber airplanes. We operated all the
time against them there. Now did you yourself get
out of headquarters and get to do some flying?
Some. I got to do some flying, but very little
combat flying. As a matter of fact, the old man
prohibited me from doing any of it.
I did get on one good long mission, but that was all.
And where was that to? out of eastern India across
Burma into Thailand.
Attacked against Japanese aircraft at what is now
Bangkok, outside of Bangkok. And you were
attacking the base? Yeah. Was it a fighter or
bomber base? Aircraft on the base. There were a few
Bettys, but they were mostly zero, mostly
fighter.
Or was it a low level of time? Yeah, right in the
deck. In the middle of the day? Right on the deck.
Oh, right on the deck. But was it at dawn? No, it was
about the middle of the day, as a matter of fact.
Just about the middle of the day, 11 o'clock, I
guess. How successful was it? Very. We got what we
went for. I don't remember the statistics on it,
but we wiped out the airplanes that were on the
field.
They were so complacent, the Japanese, because
they didn't think we could reach them. And if we
hadn't have gotten the new P-51s, well we couldn't
have, but they didn't know we got them. So we
reached them. Got it. And what were you flying?
P-51. That's all they wanted.
on that mission. Why did the commander let you go on
that mission? Well, he didn't have much choice. I
told him to.
That was pretty much the only combat mission that
he let you go? Yeah, that's right. I was along on a
lot of others, but I wasn't doing the job. Okay, so
you were observing on the others? Well, yes and no.
When Mountbatten came over to assume command, one
of the things that he had to do to get his house in
order was to go over to China and call on Chiang
Kai-shek,
which is a job I think he didn't relish too much.
But he asked Donald Stratt
and some others to go on the trip. I was one of them.
We went out of New Delhi and went into Assam, which
is on the India side of the hump.
What I wanted to do was to fly over the hump into
Kunming and then change airplanes and go to
Chongqing, because the only thing that could land
at Chongqing was a DC-3. bomber or anything like
that up here in the mountains.
So we went over the hump and went into Kunming and
changed to DC-3 and went on up to Chongqing and had
our two days of conversations with Chiang and his
people and headed back. but took off out of Kunming
one morning about a little bit before sunup, just a
little bit before. General Stratt was in the
airplane and I was flying it. I had a copilot and the
surgeon was in there and the rest were crew, tail
gunner and turret gunner and ball gunner and nose
gunner.
It was a beautiful morning over the hump. It was
just one little thin layer of clouds, about 18,000
feet.
Nice Sunday morning, everybody quiet.
They were cruising along just above this layer of
clouds, and
this top turret gunner reported a zero at 9
o'clock, and I looked. Just in time to see him duck
back into this little thin layer of clouds. He just
popped up like that and ducked back right off the
wing tail, but quite a ways off.
So I opened the throttles a little bit to get a
little more speed. Told General Stratton what was
happening.
The aircraft had been modified so that people
could sit in it in the area where it would normally
be occupied by the bomb bay or by part of the bomb
bay. I placed the top turret up here with the bottom
under it open and that's where the seats would be.
when General Stratton stood up, he stood on the
edge and looked through the door over my shoulder
into the cockpit.
The surgeon who was sitting by him, alongside of
him, didn't move, he just stayed there. He didn't
know, he wasn't plugged in so he didn't know what
was happening.
And the doctor had gone to report him again and only
about half as far out.
And so I bent the straddles a little bit more to get a
little more speed, and just the less time it takes
to say that, the top turret gun started going off.
He started shooting at them. Yeah, because he had
popped over and came up right on the tail.
he was firing at us, although none of them on that
blast hit us. But they, well these two twin 50s went
off in this turret up here. The red-hot 50 caliber
shells started falling out of that thing like this
right down everybody's lap down in the path here.
and we were on oxygen. So, this surgeon reached
over first thing, picked one of these up, of
course, and put it down there in a white heat. I
don't know why he did it. And then he recognized
what was going on. By that time, the zero had popped
up again, and he put a string of bullet holes right
through the wing section of that airplane at that
time. And the tail gunner started hollering, I got
him, I got him. And he did. He shot him down on that
path. I
looked back there, and the surgeon was just as
white as a goddamn sheet. And he was still rubbing
his throat and didn't have his oxygen mask
on. I asked him a few minutes, what the hell
happened? What's the matter with you? And he said,
hell, I swallowed my oxygen mask. I had to pull it
back up.
Oh boy, he was really a scared man when he found out
what was happening there.
But they got the airplane, we flew on across the
hump, nothing further in the way and went on home.
You must have been fairly heavily armed then. What
did you have, three .50 caliber mounts on that?
Four. I had the top gun, the one I was talking about
there, then you had the tail gun all the way back in
the back, and then the ball turret, which is in the
bottom, and then the nose turret, all with twin
50s, you see. So you had a heck of a lot more on them
than that Jebs? Yeah, he's crazy.
Well, I won't say that. He didn't use very good
judgment on it, at least. Because he was bound to
get it.
But I didn't have very many experiences to write
about during the war, combat experiences during
the war. That was a different kind of experience to
me. Now, let's talk about how you got along with the
Indians. people, and what was it like living
there?
Well, perhaps I can do better by talking about what
I did there, because you didn't have very much
contact with the Indians, to be true. When we
finished this plan for the basing of the B-29s, and
that was almost in isolation, you see, we were just
locked up all the time while we were doing that, and
going every hour of 24 hours that you could stand on
your feet. We got that finished, and that was the
time that the Sexton Conference was coming up, the
conference in Cairo.
And, you
know, Stratton wanted me to go to that conference
as the air planner for him.
as well as to work with Chenault and Mountbatten.
And Shanks, that's a new Shanks. So I went with
them. So you went to the Cairo conference?
Yeah. I've forgotten how long I was there, but it
was about ten days, and a few more days, ten I guess.
And I worked with all those people while I was
there, as well as our own people from Washington,
General Marshall, General Arnold, General
Handy, General Kuehler, and all the others that
were there. So it was a most interesting
most interesting time. And that, as you know, was
the time when the final decisions really were made
as to how this war was going to be won. And they went
out from there and did it that way. I mean there were
minor changes, but not really significant
changes. So it was the starting point of really the
strategy that ended the war. It was a very
important conference. I did not go up to Tehran
with him to see Joe Stalin. I wished I could have,
but I wasn't that high up. And now as the air
planner, what was your function there? To talk
with Hap Arnold and to discuss the problems or
what? Well, every plan that anybody presents, and
see this was a combined chiefs of staff. Yeah,
right. They have an immediate. You have to have an
air plan along with it, whatever it happens to be.
And Mountbatten was full of plans.
And so I had to put the air section of his plans
together, as he presented, and then answer
questions that were raised
about the facts of the matter. How many airplanes
has he got? What can they do? This kind of question.
And so I did that for Mountbatten, Chennault,
and General Stratton.
and worked with the other planners from all of
those commands in helping getting their
presentations ready.
It was a very interesting time in another respect.
I spent, I lived with General Chennault in
downtown Cairo. The British had taken over the
houses and assigned people to them and they
assigned people to the houses to do the cooking and
taking care of things which you have to do in a
situation like that for security reasons as well
as logistic reasons
but sometimes we could be through with our work out
at the main house so And the combined chief's going
to be considered another problem that didn't
leave us around there. We'd get the hell out of
there and go home.
I listened to Johnson off for two days
from like 3 o'clock in the afternoon until too
tired to stay up any longer at night, telling me the
story of the wandering Jew. And I don't think he
repeated an incident or a lie. It took him that
long. That man's knowledge of history was
something that I'll marvel at as long as I live.
Then he was good.
Can you describe Chenault for me? He was a
had been described as a wild man of all kinds of
things. He was actually a very careful,
thoughtful man who felt that with proper training
and equipment that Americans could exceed in any
kind of air fighting.
Could excel on that rather than And
he was a tactician in terms of developing tactics
for a particular attack, making that separate
from strategy.
And he was a very good, very accomplished fighter
pilot. I mean, a fighter jockey, if you want to call
him that. he could make his airplane do what he
wanted it to do, and when he wanted it to do it.
Therefore, not many people whipped him in the air.
And he taught his people in such a way that this held
for them. And with the AVGs, why, he proved it to the
world. Because the P-40 was certainly no match for
the Zero. But it shot down a lot of Zeros just the
same.
he had the confidence of a lot of people, including
Chiang Kai-shek and Madame Chiang,
and the support of a lot of Chinese
officers,
and therefore a very great deal of influence on
whatever military operations would take place in
China. Generally this was good. I don't mean it as
something bad,
but I think of him as a very wise, kind,
compassionate man.
A real fine American. You were a colonel at the
time. How did the general get along with his
subordinates? John Chenault? Wonderful.
Wonderful. Every one of them respected him very
much. Many of them idolized him.
By the time I'm talking about, they'd all been
decommissioned and they were civilians, you see.
while we were there that we got them reinstated
later on so that they became officers again in the
Air Force. But he had the full support of his
subordinates and always has any job he's ever had.
It's his superiors that he hasn't gotten along
with so well.
He's a little bit impatient with them and he had
some some peers that are pretty damn hard to get
along with themselves. Example, Stilwell.
Did you get to know General Stilwell? Oh, yeah. I
got to know him well enough. Could you describe
him? Well, I'd be a little bit biased, because when
he found out I had been recommended for promotion
to Breeder General, he wired John Marshall not to
do it. No kidding. Why was that?
it came out to be something silly. I had written a
plan in my planning headquarters there in New
Delhi
to win the war in CBR. Nothing strange about that.
One of my responsibilities was planning, so we did
it. And for the purposes of this plan, we made an air
theater out of the theater and won the war in the air
by air power. And in doing that we had an air officer
as theater commander which seemed perfectly
natural to me.
when the air planner, General Keeler, who was A-5
of the air staff back here in Washington, came
through China, or through India, I told him about
that. And he said, let me have a copy of it. Well, I
didn't think a damn thing about it. I gave him a copy
of it. He was the head planner for the Air Force,
And he read it on the way home from CBI. And when he
got back there, he liked it. And he gave it to
General Handy. And General Handy was the G3 of the
Army. In other words, General Marshall, the
planner. And General Handy read the plan, which
flattered me very much that he'd even read it. But
he liked it. And so he started talking to General
Marshall about it. Well, when Stilwell found out
that I had released the plan, which was just a draft
in my office, without clearing it through him, and
he didn't know a damn thing about it, he hit the
ceiling. And that's when he sent to work.
He called my boss, John Stratt, out of bed at 3
o'clock in the morning. I called him all the way
down into the middle of Calcutta to chew him out
about letting me send this thing in, letting me
release that plant. He caught it on a strap flat
footed because he didn't know anything about it
either. I hadn't shown it to him or anybody else.
And it wasn't an attempt to get by with the thing.
It's just that I had finished it and I was telling
him about it. matter of fact and started off I was
telling Kuehler about what the problem was and
said it could be solved by this method and he said
why don't you write such a plan and I said well I have
and that's when he said well let me have
it. So it was much ado about nothing but it damn near
cost me my promotion just to say. Well, without
being intent to be disrespectful, I think he was a
good battalion commander.
However, I think he was a real fighting soldier and
all that, but he didn't have any business with a
command as big as a theater, because he didn't know
how to handle people and he didn't know what, he
just knew how to hate the British. That's about the
biggest thing.
You thought the job was over his head?
Sure did. You had an opportunity to meet Shankai
Shah. And what did you think of that, ma'am? Well,
that's a real hard one. I love the Gothic. In what
way? And
his sincerity and
his helplessness in a way. He wanted to do the right
thing. He
never could get enough people to go with him at the
same time to quite swing it.
and yet that makes him sound like an angel of some
kind. I don't mean that at all.
I thought he was a great guy. He just had a bear by the
tail that I don't know whether anybody could have
handled or not. He certainly had the strength of
his convictions, or he wouldn't have done all the
things he did, including go to Taiwan. But
the U.S. let him down very much. And you can find, of
course, a lot of people tell you lots of stories
about why that was good and why it was warranted and
all that. I still think it's a bunch of baloney.
We moved the armies of Chiang into North China to
take over from the communists and did.
And it was a real operation. We moved nearly
200,000 troops by air, an average of over 1,000
miles in order to do that on the tail end of a
pipeline for gasoline. And then the United States
let the troops sit there and starve to death, while
the Communists took them over.
I
shouldn't say it quite that way.
I think we had the capacity to
have kept him in the driver's seat if we wanted to,
and we didn't. Did you ever have any conversations
with him? Oh yeah, yes. About what types of topics?
Several things, everything, every kind of
problem. I had conversations with him about
military problems, specific things that we dealt
on not a day-to-day basis but a week-to-week basis
with him. But conversations about lots of other
things too outside the military.
Do you remember any of those conversations?
Pardon? Do you remember some of those
conversations? And his attitudes? Yes, his
attitude was one of fun and wholesomeness in the
things that I talked with him about. After Pekin
fell, a group of us, including General Strath and
myself, went to Peking and had lunch with Chang and
Madame Chang in the Summer Palace in Peking, and I
was seated next to him for lunch.
Lunch of that kind lasts about three hours, and if
you don't have some lady standing behind you to
drink your hot rice wine, you won't know the end of
the three hours comes anyway.
So we talked about everything under the sun, I know
more.
I enjoyed talking to him very much.
I don't remember specifically
the subjects we talked about. What about the
charges that he was corrupt?
Well, I think anybody who survives in China at that
time, probably not true for them, had to do some
things that our people would call corrupt.
And maybe some of them were, I don't know. His aim
was not corruption. His aim was to
get away from that. To be able to have a government
and run a government without corruption. But you
can't go from a situation by a wish to a fact. And of
course there was corruption in the government,
some of which I'm sure he must have had some
knowledge of. But I don't think he was a party to,
a direct party to.